[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Every time I hear the stock
market summary at the end
of the day, I chuckle to myself.
From my point of
view, the market
is no more real than
a desert mirage,
yet it appears to many people
to be the primary indicator
of economic well-being.
Not for Pravir Malik, author of
"Redesigning the Stock Market."
Pravir, president
of a company that
specializes in helping
organizations minimize
the negative impact that
stress has on productivity
and performance, he has
extended that analysis
to the stock market.
A deeply spiritual
man as well, Pravir
has spent great deals
of time contemplating
what it would take to bring
some healthy reality back
into the stock market.
But first, he
researched exhaustively
into how the market has
descended into a shadow of what
it once was.
Thank you for writing the book.
First of all, what a feat,
"Redesigning the Stock Market."
It is-- while reading
it, I mean, we're struck,
first of all, with possibilities
because you paint this
beautiful, Utopian
picture of what life--
in my opinion-- will
soon be like, actually.
And then we go into the reality
of how money and commerce moves
around the planet
and the markets that
drive it and the dysfunction
and ultimately, the healing.
So that's the journey this
conversation will go on.
First of all, before we get
into the explanation of some
of the fractal aspects of this,
when you look at the market
today, as it stands here,
in the beginning of 2012,
is there any way this market
can sustain itself well
into the future?
>> Absolutely not.
There's-- the volume of
trade that's happening,
the reach of--
the way that the whole market
is now connected globally.
And the fact that
it's not really
driven by any kind of
sensible intelligence
really means that it is
completely unsustainable.
Because in many respects,
what we're doing is
we're destroying--
through these trades that
are happening on a
daily basis, we're
destroying the very basis on
which all life, all business
depends on.
And so the market
as it exists is
like this machinery that's
off in a different direction
than what is really needed
for sustainable existence.
>> Yes.
Absolutely.
I mean, certainly, just--
we can feel that.
And we can read headlines.
And in the past, there
were certain indicators,
such as if the market
went down, gold went up,
and these kinds of common
thoughts of the past.
These common
patterns of the past.
But all those patterns are gone.
It doesn't really matter
what you choose to invest in,
there's no sanity.
There's no way to
intelligently assess
whether this is a good thing
to put your money in anymore.
>> Yes.
Yes.
Yes, absolutely.
>> I mean, it's as
though, like you said,
a machine has taken over.
A machine run by
30-year-old males
who are behind the
wheel of a red Ferrari
and just going at
breakneck speed.
>> Yes, yes, yes.
[LAUGHS]
>> And this didn't
happen overnight, though.
>> No.
>> And what I would like to
do is get into a little bit
of the history, the
key points in history,
as were outlined by a financial
analyst named John Authers.
I think that's his name, right?
>> Yes.
>> Get into some of the
timelines of what happened,
starting from the
beginning of stock markets.
I'd like to go back to the
16th century or 17th century,
forward to this point.
So let's see what happened
to destabilize things
that before we start getting
into this fractal view
and the healing view
and the possible even
Utopian view down the road.
So let's start with the
origins of the stock market.
>> Sure.
Yes.
So back in the 1600s
is perhaps the time
where you had the stock market
really coming into existence.
And it was driven by, if
you will, the Dutch people
wanting to establish trade
routes between Europe
and the Far East.
And what they needed
to do was build up
a huge amount of capital so
that they could, in a sense,
build a Navy, build factories
for garments that could then
be traded with the Far East so
that spices could be bought in,
and other goods that Europeans
found attractive at that time.
And so what they did was,
in a sense, they opened a--
they had people from all
over the Dutch regions
really invest.
And so they raised 6.4 or 6.5--
over 6 million guilders--
>> Which was a lot.
>> At the time was huge.
Yeah, it was huge.
And with that money, they did
exactly what they wanted to,
which was they built a
Navy, they built factories.
They built the capability to
establish these trade routes.
And all this was supposed
to be in existence
only for a set number of years.
So when this charter for this
company that was being funded
was created, it was
supposed to exist for--
I can't remember the
exact number of years,
but it was for a finite period.
But what happened was that as
the success of this venture
continued, I think
the incentive,
the financial incentive, proved
to be pretty overwhelming.
And shareholders who initially
had been given the promise that
they would be able to exit
over this set number of years,
then couldn't.
And as a result, the shares that
they had needed to be traded,
and that really was the start of
the stock market, if you will.
The active start of
it, in that the shares
needed to be actively traded.
And so this was about in
the first or second decade
of 1600's so maybe
around 1614 or so.
>> And at that time, they also--
they were already developing
pretty sophisticated
tools within it,
such as short selling.
>> Yes.
>> I mean, we'd look at it
now, and people say, oh,
it should be illegal.
They're manipulating
not just metals markets,
but all kinds of markets on
short selling, which seems
like really dirty dealing.
But you're saying
in the book, here,
this was going on even then.
>> Yes, that's right.
So I think that there are a
number of financial products
that we see now that we have
not been able to regulate away
that existed back then as well.
And that, very much, I
think, as we discuss further,
it's this whole
fractal effect that
continues to repeat itself.
And the very fact that
if we look at what
had driven the creation of the
stock market to begin with,
and then its continuation.
And the most profitable
aspect of the company
that was created
at that time was
due to overpowering,
say, the other ships that
belonged to the
Portuguese or the Spanish
and appropriating the materials
from there for the funds.
And so you see this
incredible aggression
that existed way back
then that it defines
the seat of the stock
market, if you will,
or the seat of commerce that has
been in existence since then.
>> And which is greed.
>> Which is greed, yes.
Yes.
And so it's a very
interesting dynamic.
So there's greed that
continues, and it keeps--
greed will keep
driving how decisions
are made, until some
point where fear kicks in,
and then there is a crash that
occurs when the fear kicks in.
And then when the reasons for
the fear have been overcome,
then greed takes back up.
So you begin to see--
>> The Elliott
Wave as an example.
In fact, I think you
write in the book
that for this phase of
our spiritual, emotional
development as a species, which
the stock market is reflecting,
what we'll talk about
in the little bit,
that the Elliott Wave is one
of the most accurate types
of indicators, because it is
dealing with these raw emotions
that we swing through.
And people can feel it
on a personal basis.
People that play the market.
>> Yes.
That's right.
>> It's a macro and micro
dynamic of greed, fear, greed,
fear.
You know, you have a little
rest in between, maybe,
for a moment or
two, of equilibrium.
And when you're talking about
this, we're looking at--
and I don't have the stats
written in front of me--
up to 1950 or so.
So the stock market
continued developing
throughout the world,
and ultimately, we
come into more modern times now.
And we'll start isolating now
on the 20th century, where
I think the stats
were something-- set
something in the
1950s, where it took
that long a period of time,
these hundreds of years,
to get to a certain
threshold of volume.
And then it leapt to the 1990s.
And from the 1990s to--
from 2000, in fact, to 2006.
I do have stats.
The market went
from $55 trillion
global trading. $55 trillion
worth of trading in 2000
to $120 trillion in 2006.
So what has happened here?
>> Yes.
So I think that there's a
number of things that happened,
and a fair amount these
have been called out
by John Authers in his book,
"The Fearful Rise of Markets."
But essentially, the last
great stock market crash
that had occurred before
1950's was in 1929.
And following that there
was some legislation that
was put in place, the
Glass-Steagall Act of 1932,
1933.
And in that there was a
separation of commercial banks
and investment banks so
that the capital that
was being loaned to
hardworking people
could not then be used to invest
in these elaborate, fanciful
schemes that investment
banks might indulge in.
>> Which led to
the crash of '29?
>> Yes.
That was definitely part
of the problem, which
was there was a lot of
financial innovation
that had taken place.
Much like today,
where you have all
the different
financial innovation
that's been taking place.
And then in addition,
there was also,
as is now or prior to our
current financial crises,
back then also there was this
level of irrational exuberance
on the part of
consumers, investors,
and that led to the
crash, essentially.
And so there was
legislation that
was put in place to reverse
some of the effects of that.
And so we continued
on for a few decades,
until about 1950, where this
legislation was followed.
And one of the key
legislations also
was that commercial banks had to
have a high deposit insurance.
Meaning that their
level of trying
to get into very
risky areas would then
be minimized because of that.
But however, starting in
about late 1950s, early 1960s,
a number of things
happened that began
to reverse all the
safeguards that
had been put in place
from the previous crises.
And if we look at it then,
roughly in about-- in 1960s,
two things happened.
First, we saw the
emergence of a market fund.
And why that's significant
is because all year round,
investments had
been taking place
because individuals were
investing their own money,
so there was a much higher
degree of due diligence.
There was a lot more
thinking about what's
the risk if I lose this money.
And so things were invested
where probably there
were safe returns
and where there
was some useful
development taking place.
But then with the emergence
of this market fund,
it was now all these
investments from individuals
were pulled together
by a market manager.
And so it was other people's
money that was at risk.
And so the fund manager didn't
have the same kind of skin
in the game, if you will.
And plus, the way that the
market funds were incented
were completely driven
by going for volume
of assets that a
fund controlled,
rather than quality
of investments.
And so that was one big shift
that took place in the 1960s.
And then the second
thing was that there
was the emergence of
the money market funds
as well, which made these
investment banks take away
some of the core activities
of commercial banks.
The commercial banks
had an incentive
to operate more safely,
but investment banks
didn't have the same
kind of stipulations
as the commercial
banks, but now could
operate doing the same thing
that commercial banks are
doing in a much more risky way.
So you begin to see the
controls being taken away
and the sanity that existed
falling away quickly.
And then in the 1970s,
there was a huge shift.
Early 1970s, '71,
where we departed
from the gold standard.
And that's kind of a
linchpin, if you will,
in this whole thing.
Because gold, if
we think about it,
it's a finite product that
you can see very clearly.
In all of history,
there is supposed
to have been only 20 cubic
meters that had been mined.
And the amount of
money that a nation,
that any individual nation
could put into the market
was related to the amount of
gold that they actually had.
So it is a very tight system.
And so as a result of
being a tight system,
you couldn't have things like
runaway inflation occurring.
You couldn't have the money
supply going out of control.
But all that was taken away when
the gold standard was exited.
And then also when the
gold standard was exited,
essentially, gold was
pegged to the US dollar.
So for example, one ounce of
gold was worth $35 at the time.
>> Right.
And today, and $1,700 roughly.
>> Yeah.
It's completely out of control.
But essentially what
happened then was that all
the different-- when the gold
standard was exited, then
all the reserves of dollars
that different countries
around the world had
lost their value.
Because the gold began to rise--
the value of gold went
up from $35 to a lot more
when you exited the standard.
And in effect, another big
shift that happened at that time
was the oil--
OPEC.
The Oil Petroleum
Exporting Community.
They realized that they needed
to shift away from this--
they needed to create
a new standard now.
So they hiked up the price
of oil substantially.
>> Which was the new gold.
Yes, exactly.
Yes.
>> The Petrodollar.
>> Yes.
And so what happened,
that began to then
have its repercussions
in that there
was a lot of inflation
that created in the US
and globally because
of the divergence
of different global
currencies from the dollar.
You begin to have
a lot of variation
in the way that
money that was drawn
at the level of each country.
There was inflation that began
to occur all over the world.
And I think those
few shifts meant
that 1973, 1974, because
of the uncertainty, we
entered into a huge bear market,
the 1973-74 bear market, which
it occurs because
of this shift away
from the gold standard
to the oil standard.
>> And so at this time, we're in
the markets where John or Jane
Doe would say, I want to invest
in, say, an auto manufacturer.
One of the blue chip stocks.
Something where
you knew that cars
were going to be in
demand at a certain rate.
It was a safe investment.
It was an intelligent,
logical investment
from their perspective.
They studied it and looked
at the profits and losses.
So now that goes with the
money market funds come in.
When we detach from
gold, then, we're
going into the instability
of an oil-based environment
economically, which
then is bringing,
now, all of these weird
political instabilities, right?
>> Yes, absolutely.
>> Globally.
So that brings even
more instability in.
Inflation takes hold
all around the world.
>> Yes.
>> And now we're setting the
stage for what happens then
in the 1980s.
>> Yes.
So the manifest sign that
things have really shifted
occurs in 1987.
But there's, again, a few shifts
that happened before that.
So the manifest
sign, in 1987, you
have a synchronized
global crash.
And this is the first time that
stock markets around the world
drop in tremendous value in
a short time simultaneously.
And that means that
the notion of value
has completely shifted now.
Because earlier,
whereas say, investing
in a country like Brazil
or India or the US
meant something different, in
that your development in the US
was completely different
from development in, say,
a developing country
like India [INAUDIBLE]..
>> Right.
The emerging markets
started coming into play.
Which aren't those just
ripe for political and other
exploitation?
I mean, to be
totally manipulated?
>> Absolutely.
Yes, absolutely.
And there's-- I know you've met
and interviewed John Perkins.
>> Yes,
>> And his book, "Confessions
of an Economic Hit Man"
really cover that very well.
But then in addition to that,
what begins to happen in 1982,
you see the emergence of the
emerging market fund, which
means that not only
are, in a certain sense,
countries becoming part
of this, quote unquote,
"secret" empire of,
say, United States,
but now what's happening is
because of the emerging market
fund, you have a
large number of--
you have a lot
more money that can
be handled by any company in the
emerging markets suddenly being
thrust upon those emerging
markets at the corporate level.
>> And it's always tied to their
raw resources at some level.
>> Yes.
Yes, absolutely.
>> And there are some moral,
ethical issues we could go
into at length
just on that alone.
>> Yes, yes.
Yes, absolutely.
Because the fact is that the
way that this money comes in,
there's a lot of inflation that
takes place in that country.
And then very often,
the corporations who are
a recipient of the funds cannot
make payments, and so on.
And then there's a
lot of, as you say,
there's moral and ethical
issues in terms of what
they need to do to pay it back.
>> Well, and whether or not
the people even have access
to their own resources
anymore oftentimes, right?
Because those are now held
in global corporate hands.
So OK, so now we've got
the emerging markets
coming in and destabilizing
the emerging economies
of the world,
after we've already
destabilized all of the
first-world economies,
so to speak.
So then what happens?
We go into the 1990s, and then--
well, we've got junk bonds and--
>> Junk bonds.
>> --Michael Milken.
>> Yes.
In 1984, you have
two things happening.
One is that you've got the
mortgage-backed bonds that have
now been legitimized,
and that's a very--
again, a very tricky
issue, and the center
of a lot of toxic assets
that have been responsible
for even today, the
global financial crises.
So one can see that that
mainstream, toxic asset
mentality was started
at that point,
around 1984, when
mortgage-backed bonds were
legitimized.
And again, the psychology
is that you're moving away
from that safe investment
that a bank makes
to an individual
homeowner, and here you're
beginning to set the
stage for pooling together
a bunch of mortgages
into special purpose
vehicles that
investment banks set up,
and then that becomes
the basis for all kinds
of other financial
products that really
have no basis in reality.
>> And then foreign exchange.
Now we bring foreign
currencies into it.
They're kind of the bedrock
of each of the countries.
You know, a means
of doing commerce.
>> Absolutely.
In 1992, there was
the Black Wednesday.
So when George Soros really
made the Bank of England crash,
because he bought
a huge number of--
he essentially exchanged pounds
for Deutsche marks, $10 billion
in US dollars.
And as a result, the pound
dropped in tremendous value,
and then he bought them
back at the end of the day
at a profit of $1 billion US.
And that started this whole
foreign exchange capital
or asset class, if you will.
And to your point,
yes, absolutely.
It just takes away that
freedom or that sense
that each country has of--
>> Sovereignty over
their currency.
>> Sovereignty, yes.
Exactly.
>> The value of
their own currency.
Now that's gone.
That's out the window.
This beast is becoming
more bloated by the moment.
And so then we go
into hedge funds.
>> Yes, yes.
Which is-- these are
huge-volume funds.
And they're usually
very wealthy investors
who have invested in these.
And the whole purpose
of hedge funds
is to hedge to make profit to--
so that's the purpose.
And they find small, little gaps
and push the money in there,
and make a huge
profit very quickly.
And it has a huge effect in
terms of the systemic results.
So it can really
lopside how markets
should be functioning, when
you take all that money
and invest it in a small place.
>> Now, by 2005-- we won't
even get into derivatives,
because I haven't heard an
intelligent description of what
a derivative is yet.
You know, I've heard
some really good ones.
Top guys on Wall Street,
stumbling on camera.
Uh, Well it's kind of like, uh--
so we won't go into derivatives.
But let's go into the
notion of default risk.
It says here, in 2005, default
risk became an asset class.
What exactly does that mean?
>> Yes.
So again, I don't know
a whole lot on that.
So it's--
>> It's kind of like
talking about derivatives.
Now we're getting into almost--
is this like, are these
just out and out scams
being embedded in language
that sounds professional,
at this point?
These are scams.
>> Yes.
>> Investment scams.
>> I mean, so these are all
financial products that have
little basis in ground reality.
And in a sense, it's all these
bubbles that are being created.
Because it looks like-- the
perception is that there's
a lot of activity
happening when you say
the value in a certain
country is going up,
or it's become a
hotspot for investment.
There is actually--
it's a huge bubble.
Because there's not
any basis for that.
That country or that
company or that region
can't absorb that
in a productive way.
And it's inevitable that
there's going to be a crash,
and that the assets that
had been used as collateral
are now going to
become free game
for all kinds of other
financial players and investors.
So yes, in a sense,
it is like a scam.
>> It's a scam.
And now we're to the point
where I've read that--
and you can tell me if
you know this to be true--
that really one of the
ways of making the Dow
Jones, for example,
in the US markets,
look like it has any value
is by simply removing
the poor players and
substituting them
on a daily or weekly basis
with stronger performers
and then calling it
the market index, which
is totally fabricated.
It's a lie.
It has nothing to do to reflect
the actual value of what's
going on anymore from
what I understand.
>> Yes, absolutely.
>> And yet people are all
excited, and NPR, you know?
And it's supposedly the bastion
of free news in America.
It reports what's
happening on the Dow,
and then it has a nice
little sound by someone,
there's room for optimism now.
It appears our economy
is on the mend.
And you're looking
at 20% unemployment.
So none of this is true anymore.
This is a falsehood.
The market is a falsehood.
>> Yes.
And the Dow Jones
Industrial Average
is a price weighted so
there's different indices.
So it's a price
weighted index, which
means that the index
has been created--
there's companies that are
allotted a certain proportion
in that index based on the
price that they're trading at.
And so a company that is trading
at a higher price automatically
would have more of a
weightage in that index.
And so just
historically, an index
that's based like that is
going to let the market
go where it's going.
And what-- if we talk about why
that's a falsehood in a sense,
because you're
not really tapping
into the fundamental value that
companies are creating or not.
With price weighted
index, you're being driven
by the stock price that's--
>> That has nothing to do with
real value anyway anymore.
>> It has nothing to do
with real value, right.
Yeah.
So OK.
So I think we've
gotten the point across
that I said earlier, this
is kind of a bloated beast.
It's a falsehood.
The market is a falsehood.
And I know a lot of people
who used to invest in it,
they simply stopped
because there wasn't
anything making sense anymore.
Yet it continues
on, and it makes
the headline news every day,
and it's just a charade.
And now I'd like to
now back off from that.
We get an idea of what's
happened and how we got here.
And you're looking
at the markets
now through this
fractal approach which
has to do with three
phases of development;
the physical, the
vital, and the mental.
>> Yes.
>> And this has really
deeply rooted, sane,
spiritual principles
behind it as well.
Can you give us a
brief description
of the physical phase, the vital
phase, and the mental phase
and examples of
what that would look
like in a market structure?
>> Sure.
So the simplest way
that I can describe it
is by thinking about a
journey that a seed makes
in becoming a flower.
So if we think
about that, there's
three stages of
development; there's a seed,
there's the stalk,
which is a middle stage,
and then there's a flower,
which is the culmination.
So the seed, if we
look at the seed,
it's really a finite, closed
entity that apparently
has very little activity.
It maintains its status
quo until it's germinated.
And so when we think
about the physical,
it's this impulse to
keep things as they
are, much like the seed, so we
remain at a status quo level,
keep the rules that had
been operating in the past.
>> Like the gold standard.
Exactly.
Yes.
That's right.
>> OK.
So that would be an example of--
>> The physical.
>> The physical stage.
>> Yes.
>> Very stable.
Yes.
>> There's not a lot of room
for growth or rapid growth out
of it, per se.
>> Exactly.
Yes, that's right.
The vital stages, like that
stalk in the middle stage,
where there's--
and the stalk is just
meant to be a metaphor,
but there's a lot more
assertiveness in that growth.
And if you think about
the seed growing,
there is, relatively, a
lot more assertiveness,
and there's a whole
root structure.
There's a tendril
structure that's created.
There's a lot more exchange
with the environment; gases,
nutrients exchanged.
So there's a lot more activity.
It may not be ordered activity,
but there is activity,
and it could--
it's kind of the foundation
of aggressiveness
and of wanting to
appropriate things for one's
own small self,
in a certain way.
>> For its own assurance
of growth and survival.
>> Yes, yes.
Exactly.
So it's, I think, the Darwinian
notion of competitiveness.
And very much, when
we think about markets
today, it's really about that.
Each player existing
for its own self
or trying to
appropriate resources
to aggrandize its own notion
of what it exists for,
and that's kind of that vital
phase, that middle phase.
And then the mental phase is
where there's a culmination.
So that idea that existed in
a dormant state in the seed
now has a chance to show
itself, and so there
is a uniqueness that comes out.
There's purpose.
There's intent.
And that's, I think,
very well captured
by this notion of a flower
that also could be unique.
It has intent, it has purpose,
it has mystery, it has depth.
>> While still being connected
to its original seed source.
>> Yes.
While still being connected.
Absolutely.
>> Yes.
>> So that's the
physical, vital, mental.
And in fact, as you said, if we
think about the market timeline
that we just went through,
then the gold standard
could be the physical is kind
of representative of that.
The oil standard
is representative
of the vital phase,
and very interestingly,
if we think about what
oil is, it's, in a sense,
these crushed,
pressurized remains
of entities that at one
point existed on the earth.
These plant and animal entities
that, if you look at it,
are physical and vital
in their consciousness.
So oil is a great metaphor
for this vital consciousness.
And the question
is, what's next?
>> Well, and it brings with
it also that aggression
and potential chaos and
instability of that phase
of growth.
>> Absolutely.
Yes.
>> And so next?
>> And so what's next,
that's this notion of another
standard.
And in the book,
what I talk about,
potentially, is perhaps
a solar standard, but--
>> Solar.
>> A solar standard.
But the real-- the point
being is that this is not--
solar energy is
existing everywhere.
It's not something that
you capture and put,
and that you control.
>> You can't own it.
>> And it's available
to everybody.
It exists in the different
kinds of services
that nature provides around us.
I mean, they all have solar
energy embedded in them.
Even if we think
about plants, they've
come into being because of
the way that they've converted
solar energy to something else.
And so here what we're saying
is that there is essentially
a kind of a--
if we think about
it in market terms,
there needs to be a
democratization of markets.
And that solar standard is the
metaphor for that, if you will.
>> And something that links
back to something of true value.
>> Of true value.
Yes.
>> Where the assets
of true value,
resources or whatever
of true value.
>> Yes, yes.
>> And so we're a
long way from there.
>> Yes.
Yes.
Now, I think that there
are a couple of things.
One is that so if we analyze
where we're at right now,
we're very much-- if we--
just by looking at the volume
activity, the reach
of activity, we
can see we're at
the vital level.
But even looking at it
much more specifically,
the number of stock market
indices that have been created.
You had cited the 55
trillion to 120 trillion
in just less than a decade.
>> Six years.
Yeah.
>> Just the number of
crashes that have occurred.
The variation in stock price.
The daily gains and
losses that have--
the variation in that itself.
That's all part of the vital--
the fact that that's happening
so much more in the last 10,
15 years is a sure indication
that the stock market
itself is at the vital level.
And if we go back to this
notion of what's next,
what I'm proposing is that
this physical to the vital
to the mental, so this
seed becoming a flower
is a sustainable
pattern of progress.
And so we see it in
the flower, but even
if we think about many different
progressive developments that
have taken place
across the earth,
we'll see that
same pattern, where
there's a shift from the
physical to the vital
to the mental.
And so when we
think about what's
next in terms of the
market, then there
is this notion that we
have to move from the vital
to the mental.
>> And I think you've made
a really good case for that.
We can't stay in this unstable
phase any longer, that's
essentially ready to burst
beyond anything physical
or tangible any longer.
And so when we're
in this vital stage,
at the same time, as
you have mentioned,
we have moved into, essentially,
a global community when
it comes to commerce and money.
Globalization has occurred.
This isn't a concept
in the future.
So how do you bring the mental
aspect of commerce and movement
of funds and such-- not funds,
but development of markets,
into this globalization,
this global environment that
has already occurred,
in a democratic fashion,
as an example of the
solar or the sun influence
on the planet and the seed?
How does that-- how do we begin?
>> Yeah.
I think that's really
the crux of it.
But I just want to say
one more thing, actually.
And that's when we think
about the vital level,
it's like this.
We've talked about
the volume of flows
that have changed, the rhythm
of flows that have changed
substantially, and
essentially, the recipient
of any of these volume
and rhythm of flows
now gets subjected
at the vital level
to something
completely different
from their innate nature.
And so what's happening
is that if there
is any kind of resonance in
that receiving object or market
or corporation to
these forces, then--
which we know are
totally vital--
then that aspect comes
forward from that entity.
So what we've seen today in the
play out of the vital market
is essentially the
vital part of what's
contained in markets
or in corporations
or in people is what's
coming to the front.
And so there's a resonance.
>> Give us an example of that.
So I know exactly what you mean.
>> So just stepping back in--
two things.
I'll talk about two things.
One is that the notion of
when something is subjected
to love, for instance,
then if there's love in it,
it's going to respond with--
then love is going to
probably come forward.
If something is subjected to
hate, if there's hate in it,
hate is going to come forward.
So these incredible vital flows,
which are about fear and greed,
they're creating a resonance at
a very minute or micro level,
at the individual level, at
the level of corporations,
to also function
in a similar way.
So the very fact that we've gone
through this huge arc whereby
everything has been
appropriated into, in a sense,
one global mechanism means that
all these different entities,
there's a part of themselves,
or their consciousness
is being overshadowed by this
vital aspect of greed and fear,
and that's what we're
seeing a lot more of.
And so the question
is how do we bridge
from that to the mental level?
>> How do we?
>> Yeah.
>> [LAUGHS] That's a question.
So there's a couple of things.
And I'd say that
practically speaking,
it can't be done suddenly,
because if it's--
all of a sudden, if we allowed--
if central banks
didn't intervene
in the way that they did
right now, in the last three
to four years, five years,
if they didn't suck up
junk assets, if they didn't
make sure the money supply was
unaffected, if they didn't
reduce interest rates, reduce--
relatively speaking-- tax
rates, then there would be--
because of the huge
fall off of a lot
of financial institutions,
there would be a huge crisis
that would occur overnight.
>> Yes.
Globally.
>> Globally.
Globally yes.
And so if we think about
the intervention that's
happened from the central
banks, in a sense,
it's a good thing
because it's allowed
the way that people have
lived at the ground level
to continue.
The shock would
have been too great
if all these domineering
institutions were
allowed to fail overnight.
And I think that as we
talk about a transition
from vital to mental,
the very first step--
I mean, there's
two ways to do it.
Either you can
stabilize a vital,
knowing that it's
very temporary,
and that now you need to build
a bridge towards the mental,
or you can just take a
leap into the mental,
and allow things to
totally crash and burn,
and then something else
will emerge from that,
but there'll be a lot
of pain associated
with it in the short term.
And so I think we're
at this critical stage
now where all these different
institutions continue
to uphold the--
>> The triage has
already occurred, right?
To keep people so they can
afford, for the most part, food
and a roof over
their heads, and--
the basics have continued
on for the most part.
And I know there are some
countries and people who
have suffered greatly.
But generally
speaking, globally,
life has gone on as usual, if
to a lower standard of living.
And that's true, and
it's brought up a lot
of questions for us to look at.
I mean, as the
money has gone away,
the ability for people to--
for example-- buy
homes has gone away.
Young people to be able to
have their own apartment.
A lot of that's gone
in the Western world.
Now people are living
together again.
A lot of people in
their 20s and even 30s
are moving back into their
parents' homes because
of the lack of
availability of work.
So this is part of
that triage period
where we're having to start
adjusting our view of what
has value in life,
which seems to me is
an appropriate precursor to
the mental, because isn't it
about establishing true
value again across the board?
>> Yes, yes.
Absolutely.
And I think that from
the perspective of what
can be done at the level
of markets, so there's
this bridge that
needs to be built.
And the way that the
stock market itself
functions can be
altered to allow
more of a semblance of the
mental to come into being.
And essentially, one of the
leading models, if you will,
of modern financial development
has been this notion
of efficient market hypothesis.
>> And what does that mean?
>> And that's really where
a price, say, of a stock is,
quote, unquote,
"informationally efficient."
It means it captures
all the realities that's
happening in the market.
And so the price
totally reflects
all the issues that need
to be considered and--
>> Of the health of that
particular entity or company
or whatnot.
>> Yes, yes.
I mean, so in efficient market--
>> Going back to the
way it used to be.
way it used to be, yes.
In efficient market
hypothesis, prices never lie.
I mean, it's all
about reflecting
exactly what the reality is.
But we know for a fact
that financial markets
don't function that
way, because they
function by this notion
of greed and fear.
>> Does this mean establishing
a new type of index based
on that, for example?
>> Yes.
Yes, definitely.
I think there's a few different
things that need to be done.
But I brought that up because
what I was trying to get at
was that the way that the
stock is traded right now
is not based on efficient
market hypothesis,
it's based on this
notion of fear and greed.
And if we want to begin to
approach the mental level,
we have to change
the way that stock
is created so that it
approaches more this reality
of efficient market hypothesis.
So When we think about
efficient market hypothesis,
it's having a lot
more information
that's true about the
environment being reflected
in the stock price.
>> Transparency, too.
>> Transparency.
Yes, absolutely.
And so all the costs
that were externalized,
whether environmentally,
socially,
that were not reflected
in the price of an asset
or the price of a stock
need to be reflected
in the price of the stock.
And that's not going
to be done voluntarily.
It's not going to be done by the
way these indexes are set up.
So we would have to, in
a sense, change the way
the stock market functions so
that that information can come
into it that's required so
that the right kind of trades
happen based on the true cost
or the true price of what's
being traded.
>> Mhm.
It makes total sense.
Yes.
>> And then the point that
you had brought up around
the index.
Yes, a totally new kind of
index needs to be created
or already exists.
The more fundamentally
weighted indexes.
So what drives stock markets--
Stock market
indices today, if we
think about the Dow Jones
Industrial Average is a price
weighted index.
If we think about
NASDAQ and S&P,
they are market
weighted indices.
And both those indices would
be great if we already operate
at the mental level, but
the fact is, we don't.
And so at the vital
level, they just
magnify whatever the direction
that things are already
going on.
They already go there.
So one of the things
is that we would
need to put much more
weightage on fundamentally
weighted indices.
And fundamentally
weighted indices
means that we're getting
to the true value
that a company is
actually creating.
So what are it's true sales?
What are its true costs?
What are its earnings?
What is it actually doing?
And that information
is used to weight
a proportion in an index.
So it's much more
realistic, and it
begins to ground things more.
So it's not this huge bubble
that's being acted on,
but there's a ground reality
by which investors can
make more grounded decisions.
>> Is there somewhere
where this already exists?
Is being tried, or?
>> You know, I'm not exactly
sure if it's actually existing
in any of the stock markets
today, or if it's an index.
But in studies
that have been done
where you have fundamentally
weighted indexes versus, say,
price weighted or the
market weighted indices
over a period of 30 to
40 years, those studies
have indicated that the
fundamentally weighted index
would outperform existing
indexes that are primarily
used to filter funds
into the stock market.
So I don't know if it's
actually being used,
but studies indicate
that it would--
by looking at real
companies, there was--
I forget who did
the study, but it
indicates that it would
yield a higher return.
>> Interesting.
Instead of this unstable stuff,
where it's flying one day
and crashing the next.
OK.
So is what we're looking at
more or less along the line,
in just colloquial
terms, of what
would be called socially
responsible investing
in addition to that?
Is that an add-on to that, or
a part of this fundamentally?
>> It's an add-on.
So I think that that's a really
good point, because actually,
what the market has been going
the way that it has been going
for a few decades, and
especially since 1995
to now, where things have gotten
incredibly in the vital level.
And there's been
this natural reaction
from a number of
stakeholders around the world
to put sanity into the way
investments take place.
Socially responsible
investing has, of course,
been going on for
probably as long
as the institution
of business has
existed, from the
religiously minded who--
initially we have said, OK.
Keep away from sin
industries or industries
that harm your
health, and so on.
But that's become a much
bigger movement today.
So of the available investments
of $25 trillion or so
in the US, $3 trillion of that
is through socially responsible
investing.
So it's a growing percentage.
>> That's big.
That's growing.
Yes.
>> And then in addition to
that, just following up on that,
that's from-- so perhaps when
we think about it from the shift
from the vital to the mental.
We can see that socially
responsible investing
is perhaps from those
stakeholders who are already
at the mental level.
>> At the mental level, yes.
That makes sense.
>> But then if we think about
other movements that are
occurring.
So have this whole--
the GRI, the Global
Reporting Initiative
that started, again,
in reaction to the way
that things have been
going the last 15 years
or so, where there's a lot
more parameters, factors that
have to do with the environment
and cost to society that
are also integrated
into evaluating
or how a company is doing.
So that becomes
a filter as well.
So you have that
movement, the GRI.
Then you have PRI,
which is the Principles
of Responsible Investing,
which is financial institutions
themselves looking at how
they can be more responsible
and factor in environmental,
social governance
considerations into who
they choose to invest with.
So a number of
different stakeholders
around the world who perhaps
we can say are more at that--
either at the mental level
or wanting to go there,
are putting into place
these different frameworks
from the outside.
And then the fact also is that
there's been this huge movement
from the bottom up.
Peter Hawkins, in his
book, "Blessed Unrest"--
>> Oh, Paul Hawkins.
Yes.
>> Yeah.
I mean Paul Hawkins.
Yes.
He reflects on how a million
to 2 million organizations
around the world
are actually trying
to combat a lot of the
environmental and social ills
that have been
created as a result
of our irresponsible
investing in business.
>> And to say nothing
of Occupy Wall Street.
>> Occupy Wall Street, exactly.
>> Just basically objecting
to the way money is used
and managed and
exploited and wasted.
Just that in itself.
>> Yes, yes.
Absolutely.
And so I think that what's
being indicated just very
organically from the way that
business flow is interacting
with life is that there are
a number of stakeholders
from many different places
and perspectives who
are waking up and saying, no.
This isn't going to do.
And the question is how can we--
what I talk about in
the book is how can we
really go the next
step and integrate that
into the actual way that
the stock market functions.
So it's well and
good when you have
all these different filters
being applied from the outside,
and you have indices
that are set up
that may filter funds
into the stock market,
but the question
is can the stock
market itself be changed so
that these filters become part
of the heuristics that
automatically determine
the pricing of stocks
on a day-to-day basis.
>> What's the answer to that?
>> Currently, no.
I think absolutely possible
with the technology
that we have existing today.
So when we think about
what would it really take
to make something like that
work, just very practically
speaking, you would
need to have sensors
in the environment, nano
sensors that would pick up
if there was any
kind of compromise
to, say, the quality of
water or the quality of air
or the quality of the soil.
And if you had nano sensors
in these different places,
it would pick it up.
And then these could be part
of a network, a secure network,
that are fed back into stock
exchanges around the world.
And you would have filters
and the actual algorithms that
exist or that should exist in
the functioning of the stock
market, to take
into account some
of these different
real-time inputs
that are very, very
important in factoring
what a stock price should be.
So for example, if we know
for a fact that you have, say,
a corporation like when the oil
spill happened just last year--
>> Yeah.
BP.
>> BP.
BP, yes.
You have sensors that
pick up that something's
totally awry over
there, and then you
know what the source of that is.
This would go and put an
automatic stop on trading
of BP and plus slow down the
whole category of oil and gas,
so every other company in
that, until it could be proven
by those companies that
they were putting in place,
or they had in place
various practical approaches
to change any kind
of degradation
to the environment
or social costs,
they have the right
technologies in place.
And then only, the
price would be released.
The stock price would allowed
to be traded or allowed
to climb back to its level.
So there's several
things that can--
>> Much more sophisticated
level of reporting.
>> Yes.
Yes, absolutely.
>> And oversight.
>> Yes and the reason why I went
there at all in this book is
the reality of where we're at.
I mean, when it comes down to
trading, at the end of the day,
it is the quote,
unquote, "fight."
The physical,
vital consciousness
of this notion of greed that
overpowers other instincts.
And whether you're an investor
or-- the stock markets
themselves are
for-profit institutions
that are often publicly traded.
So there's a very
controversial set
of dynamics in stock
markets themselves
in that they can't necessarily--
their incentive is to create
profit for their shareholders.
And so an easy way to do that
is to list more companies,
regardless of the kind
of company that it is.
Regardless of the
kinds of practices
that those companies
might be involved in.
And every trade that happens,
they benefit from it,
whether it's a sell or a buy.
The stock market
benefits from it.
The shareholders
benefit from it.
The investors benefit from it.
The company likely
benefits from it.
And so that whole
infrastructure of currently,
the way that it's
set up, it's not
really incentive to have
something that's objective.
>> No.
I was going to say, you have
the fox watching the hen house,
so to speak.
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> What's it going to take to be
able to put another layer of--
and I don't like the notion
of greater governments,
but just a sense
of responsibility.
Some kind of
governing factor that
adds this layer of
responsibility over the markets
again.
Do you even see this
happening, or do you
see it more having to
collapse and something
new being given birth
to with newer standards?
>> So my hope is that we don't
have to go through a whole
collapse and the huge damage
that that causes in order
to get there.
But the reality is that the
way that we're going right now,
and the fact that none of the
governments around the world,
or policymakers, are really
making any substantial shifts
that need to be made to the
financial environment, I mean,
what they've been doing
is just allowing things
to proceed the way that
they've always proceeded
and getting things
back to usual business.
And so when you look at
that it's questionable.
And then it's these
movements like Occupy
or the 2 million organizations
that Paul Hawkins talks about,
or whatever it is that
you have to rely on.
So there's this notion power
of the people or democracy,
true democracy that would
have to come in place
to allow something to /
And in the interim,
since we can't--
I don't think we can afford to
have the kind of catastrophe
we're talking about or the
kinds of irresponsible trades
continuing the way that
they've been continuing.
Because if we look at
the way that stock--
the volume has risen
from 1995 to 2010.
And the irresponsibility
of many corporations
have been recipients
of those funds.
We see a correlation between--
they are kind of-- the way
that they might exploit
environmental and social
conditions in order to make
sure that they get profit.
And so we see that as a
fact, that as a market
receives more funds
in the stock market,
it's irresponsibility
factor also goes up.
>> It increases, yes.
>> So in the face of that,
as an interim measure,
this more sophisticated
reporting where you have nano
sensors might be coming into
providing information in real
time.
That would be an
interim measure.
But again, the real key is that
this shift of consciousness
that needs to happen at the
consumer level, from the vital
to a mental level.
>> So just a quick
question then,
because I know we're
almost out of time here.
We could go on quite a bit.
If you're a consumer who
wishes to participate
in the market or markets in a
responsible, reflective way,
how do we go about that right
now in this insane environment?
>> Yeah.
So right now, it's making
sure that the number
of indices, the socially
responsible indices
are increasing.
There's free-- for
example, even Dow Jones
has created a Dow
Jones Sustainability
Index, which currently has
maybe $8 billion in its market.
Not much.
But that's certainly
one way is make sure
that we're investing in a
socially responsible company--
in financial institutions that
have signed those principles
for responsible investing
that now a much larger number
of institutes have signed them.
Making sure that if there's a
fund manager or mutual funds,
that they have filters
to really ensure
that the money is being used
for environmentally and socially
responsible companies.
Or even in stock markets,
some leading practices,
some stock markets
for example, if we
look at Johannesburg
stock market,
they've instituted
a practice where
each of the companies who
lists on the stock markets
needs to have
integrated reporting.
So the annual report, you have
to have a CSR report integrated
in with the annual report.
And so that again is a
whole level of disclosure.
So checking to see
what was really--
how the stock exchange
itself is functioning.
Or in Taiwan, we have
a similar best practice
where each of the
listed companies
is expected-- they have
to provide disclosure
on their environmental and
social practices in order
to list.
>> So it's starting.
>> It's starting.
>> The seeds have been planted.
>> Yes.
>> And so it's up to us now
to not put our money in these
places with this manic
depressive ride any longer.
We need to pull that
out, and we need
to place it with some, as you
say, research and intelligence
into this emerging mental phase
of consciousness in markets.
And that's up to us.
We have to do the
research ourselves.
But you've helped
us by giving us
some really good ideas toward
the tail end of this book.
And at least-- and
also well defining what
the problem is to begin with.
And I really thank you for--
I'm not a-- I don't understand
markets that well, so thank you
for bearing with me in this
interview in our layperson's
conversation on all of it.
>> Thank you.
>> Thank you very much.
>> To pick up a copy
of Pravir's book,
"Redesigning the Stock
Market," or his previous book,
"Connecting Inner Power
with Global Change,"
you can visit amazon.com.
There's little doubt in my
mind that the existing market
must be reformed or perish as
a result of excessive bloating
and mismanagement.
Pavir gives us a
good look at what
must be done to bring the
markets back to good health.
Until next time, Thanks
for watching CMN.